---
layout: post
title: SQL and Product Management Role - Clark Construction
image: "/posts/r&d.jpg"
tags: [SQL, KPIs, Product Management]
---

# Summary
<!-- ---
layout: post
title: Manpower App: SQL and Product Management Role - Clark Construction R&D
image: "/posts/r&d.jpg"
tags: [SQL, KPIs, Product Management]
---


# Summary -->

For the latter half of 2019 and January 2020, I managed an initiative at Clark Construction to
improve daily manpower reporting on construction sites. The focus of the team was to create an
app that allows subcontractors to:
1. Enter how many people were working that day
2. Describe which activities were worked on that day

In tandem with a co-worker, I created the frameworks for the visuals and reporting features in
the application.

## Product Management Role

To start, I helped design a user-friendly interface that allowed end users to easily input data daily
into a database. This was a critical component of the application because without user support
and input, the app would not be used and there would be no data to analyze by my group.
Once a successful data entry system was created, I helped create and modify a Report Approval
module to clean the subcontractor-input data. The module allowed Clark staff to view submitted
data, edit as needed to ensure accuracy, and approve the final report submissions. Without this
feature, inaccurate data could be used in final analytics and skew manpower metrics.
With this in place, I helped develop analytical tables for our project staff. The key table I
developed displayed approval status and summary manpower values. A mockup of this table is
shown below. Each column represents a date, and each row represents the manpower of a given
subcontractor per day. If a subcontractor submits a report, that day’s cell turns green for that
contractor. If a subcontractor is supposed to be working but did not submit a report their cell will
appear red. A cell appears white if no workers are needed that day.
The table allows project managers to view manpower trends on a project for any date range at a
glance, a feature not available on previously used software. With these trends, project managers
can now more easily do the following:

1. Determine which subcontractors are scheduled to be on site, and why scheduled
contractors are not on site. This helps managers determine whether a project is on-time,
and create mitigation plans as needed to recover any lost time.
2. Contact subcontractors to inquire about insufficient manpower. Having a concise table of
manpower allows project managers to quickly determine whether any subcontractors
have critically low manpower that could slow down progress.
3. Estimate total hours worked on the project for safety record reporting. Prior to the
creation of this table, managers could spend hours or days performing similar estimates
and paperwork for official, mandated records.
4. Determine which daily reports are not approved, and ensure reports subsequently get
approved. Without approval, executive leadership can’t be sure of the report’s accuracy.

## SQL KPI Development

After creating the reporting table above, the team also wanted to create performance measures
for the application to track how project teams were using the app. This would allow executive
leadership to determine whether the app was successful as a whole and monitor individual
project performance. I developed 5 metrics as part of this process. These metrics were as
follows:
1. Accuracy - measures whether subcontractors are submitting accurate reports, judged by
determining whether Clark personnel have edited any of the information submitted by
subs. This is critical because if Clark has to edit many entries, then we are not saving as
much time as anticipated by using the new system.
2. Compliance - measures the number of subcontractors that are submitting reports, as a
percentage of subs that are expected to be working. This is critical because if subs are not
using the new app, then the time spent developing it may have been wasted and it may
not be worth Clark's time and money to maintain and continue to build out the new app.
3. Timeliness - measures the percentage of subcontractors that submit a daily report within
48 hours of the day activities took place. As time goes on, subs are more likely to forget
the details of what happened on previous days and having this statistic can help teams
ensure reports are submitted on time and are hopefully more comprehensive as a result.
4. Timely Compliance - measure combines #2 and #3. This helps teams determine the
number of subs submitting on time as a percentage of how many total reports they are
expecting. This is a more complete measure of compliance.
5. Validation - measures the percent of reports the Clark team has approved. If reports are
not approved, they also have likely not been reviewed by Clark. This is critical because if
Clark is not validating daily submissions, then inaccurate or incomplete daily reports may
not be check.
